 Investment Theory

1 The tangible benefits of rebalancing
The point of this exercise is to quantify the benefits of rebalancing. Suppose that you are
investing in two stock market indices, AAA and ZZZ. Both risky assets have returns that are
normally distributed, with the same mean return (10%) and the same standard deviation
(20%). Further, the correlation between the two risky returns is zero. Also, assume the
risk-free rate is zero.
1. What is the optimal (i.e. mean-variance efficient) allocation among the two securities?
2. Now, we will examine the performance of two strategies over an investment horizon of
100 years. We will do so across many simulations (say 10,000 though you can choose
any number you want). For each simulation,
(a) Simulate a vector of returns for the two risky assets, AAA and ZZZ. Use your
software’s build in random number generator.
For example, in Matlab, you can simulate a normal variable with mean μ and
standard deviation σ via x = μ + σ × randn, where randn simulates a standard
N (0, 1) variable.
(b) Compute the returns to your initial wealth of the buy and hold strategy—that is,
the strategy in which you allocated optimally at t = 0 and then did not rebalance.
(c) Compute the returns to your initial wealth of the rebalanced strategy—that is,
the strategy in which you rebalanced at the end of every year to the ‘optimal’
portfolio weights.
1
(d) Compute the realized Sharpe ratio for each of the two strategies above. In addi-
tion, compute the average allocation to the first risky asset AAA in the buy and
hold strategy (in the rebalancing strategy it should be constant by construction).
3. Plot a histogram of the realized Sharpe ratio across simulations of the two strategies.
What is the average Sharpe ratio of each strategy? Also plot the mean portfolio weight
to asset 1 of the buy and hold strategy. Discuss your findings.
For the purposes of this exercise, it will be best to use a programming language like
MATLAB, Octave, or R. It is possible to do it in Excel, though it will be rather painful.
To get you started in Matlab, we have posted some sample code for simulating returns in
GettingStartedhw4p1.m.
2 Human Capital
Let us revisit the portfolio problem in Topic 2 (and in the problem above), but now let us
take into account your human capital. As before, you can invest your wealth into either the
riskless asset (1% per year) or in three stock market indices with the following characteristics:
Asset E(r) σ
US 8.0% 19%
Japan 3.7% 25%
Mexico 6.0% 15%
Correlations
Assets US J M
US 1.0 0.5 0.8
J 0.5 1.0 0.2
M 0.8 0.2 1.0
Now, let us add a fifth asset, your human capital. Assume that human capital accounts
for 50% of your total wealth. This is an asset that you are endowed with, but that you cannot
rebalance (you cannot buy more human capital and you cannot sell your human capital).
(i) First assume that your human capital is riskless. Solve your portfolio choice problem
assuming you are a mean variance investor with γ = 4. That is, what are the optimal
weights (of financial wealth) in each stock market index and the riskless asset.
(ii) Redo part (i) assuming that your human capital is only 20% of your total wealth.
2
(iii) Now assume that human capital is risky. To keep things simple (at first), assume that
your human capital has the same return as the US stock market.
(a) If human capital is 20% of your wealth, can you achieve the same Sharpe ratio as
in part (ii). If so, how? If not, why not?
(b) If human capital is 50% of your wealth, can you achieve the same Sharpe ratio as
in part (i). If so, how? If not, why not?
(iv) Optional “Challenge” Question: you are not required to answer this question to get full
credit on the problem set. But, it might be fun to try :) A more realistic assumption
is that your human capital is only positively correlated with the US stock market.
Suppose that the mean return to your human wealth is 9% per year, with a standard
deviation of 25%. The correlation of your human capital returns with the return on
US, Japan, and Mexico stock market indices is 0.3, 0.1, and 0.1, respectively. Assume
that human capital accounts for 50% of your total wealth. Solve the portfolio choice
problem assuming you are a mean-variance investor with γ = 4. That is, what are the
optimal weights (of financial wealth) in each stock market index and the riskless asset.
(Hint: Use the Alternative Approach on Slide 47 of the MPT Lecture Notes. You will
be optimizing over the weights in US, Japan and Mexico having fixed the weight in
human capital at 0.5. Write down the first-order conditions for each of the three risky
asset weights. This is a system with three linear equations and three unknowns. Solve
this system and use the solution answer the question.)
3